Add gas recommender IIP (#17)
iotaledger/IIPs: iips/IIP-0003/iip-0003.md

As a result, users often underbid and get rejected or delayed, or overbid and waste IOTAs, especially in high-traffic scenarios. This unpredictability harms user experience and undermines efficiency.

To solve this, we propose a feedback-driven gas price recommendation engine that analyzes historical transaction outcomes to predict the minimum tip that would likely have led to inclusion. This enables nearly accurate, real-time tip suggestions without requiring changes to the protocol, improving fairness, reliability, and developer experience.

## Specification

This proposal introduces a feedback and prediction mechanism for gas price estimation in transactions involving shared objects on the IOTA smart contract platform.

### Gas Price Feedback
As part of the core node logic, each time a transaction is scheduled, the node records its gas price and execution duration per shared object it accesses. When a transaction is later cancelled due to repeated deferrals, the node provides a gas price suggestion—a value that would likely have resulted in successful inclusion under the observed congestion levels.

> This value is computed using percentile-based statistics over recorded gas prices per object, adjusted according to transaction duration and the severity of congestion. The feedback is embedded in the deferral response to the client and requires no protocol modification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This value is computed as the maximum over recorded gas prices per input shared object, adjusted according to transaction duration and the severity of congestion. The feedback is embedded in the cancellation response to the client and requires no protocol modification.
```

### Gas Price Prediction

> A prediction engine uses the historical gas price feedback to estimate, before submission, the minimum tip a user should attach to ensure inclusion. This engine operates off-chain and is designed to be integrated into wallets, SDKs, or development tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A prediction engine uses the historical gas price feedback to estimate (before transaction submission) the minimum gas price a user should attach to ensure successful execution. This engine operates off-chain and is designed to be integrated into wallets, SDKs, or development tools.
```

> The predictor models shared-object contention using a per-object congestion weight vector, which is updated incrementally using online stochastic gradient descent. For a new transaction, the engine uses these weights to compute a harmonically weighted gas price suggestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The predictor models shared-object contention using a per-object congestion weight vector, which is updated incrementally using online stochastic gradient descent. For a new transaction, the engine uses these weights to compute a harmonically weighted suggested gas price.
```

### Syntax and Semantics

> #### Gas Price Feedback API (Node):

Reviewer: I do not understand what is written in this section. You need to glue these bullet points and short sentences.  I think you need to write down where the feedback gas price is contained in a checkpointed transaction, and how that feedback gas price is going to be used by the recommender.

New field in cancellation response:

`suggested_gas_price: u64`

> A recommended gas price for resubmission, computed from historical scheduling outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A suggested gas price for resubmission, computed from historical scheduling outcomes in the feedback mechanism.
```

#### Prediction Interface (External Tool):

Input: Transaction metadata (touched objects)

> Output: Estimated recommended_gas_price: u64

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Output: Estimated `recommended_gas_price: u64`
```

> An anticipatory recommendation before submission.

Reviewer: Solitary sentence again with no obvious connection to the rest of the text.

This specification introduces no changes to consensus, validity rules, or core transaction semantics. It adds observational logic and client-side estimation tools to enhance user experience without impacting protocol security or performance.

## Rationale

> The motivation for this proposal stems from a fundamental user experience issue in IOTA’s transaction model: users interacting with shared objects have no guidance on how much gas price (tip) they should offer to ensure inclusion. This leads to inefficiencies—users may overpay, or worse, repeatedly underbid and have their transactions cancelled. The current mechanism lacks any feedback or proactive recommendation logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motivation for this proposal stems from a fundamental user experience issue in IOTA’s transaction model: users interacting with shared objects have no guidance on how much gas price (tip) they should offer to avoid cancellations due to congestion. This leads to inefficiencies—users may overpay, or worse, repeatedly underbid and have their transactions cancelled. The current mechanism lacks any feedback or proactive recommendation logic.
```

> The motivation for this proposal stems from a fundamental user experience issue in IOTA’s transaction model: users interacting with shared objects have no guidance on how much gas price (tip) they should offer to ensure inclusion. This leads to inefficiencies—users may overpay, or worse, repeatedly underbid and have their transactions cancelled. The current mechanism lacks any feedback or proactive recommendation logic.

Reviewer: > The current mechanism lacks any feedback or proactive recommendation logic.

I am lost again. Is this proposal introduces the feedback mechanism as well, or it assumes the feedback is already provided by the protocol?

### Design Decisions
To address this, the design separates the solution into two components:

#### In-node Gas Price Feedback:

> The gas price suggestion returned upon transaction cancellation is computed from real historical data observed by the node. It reflects object-level congestion at the time of deferral and uses percentile-based aggregation over recorded gas prices and execution durations. This provides immediate, data-grounded feedback to users without modifying protocol rules.

Reviewer: > without modifying protocol rules.

In-node gas price feedback **does require** modifications in the protocol.

#### External Prediction Engine:

> A learning-based model predicts, prior to submission, the minimum gas price likely required for successful inclusion. This model is trained on historical feedback collected over time. We chose online stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for its simplicity, adaptability, and low overhead in a high-throughput setting. It continuously updates per-object congestion weights and requires minimal infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to transaction submission, a learning-based model predicts the minimum gas price likely required for successful execution (i.e., cancellation due to congestion is avoided). This model is trained on historical feedback collected over time. We chose online stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for its simplicity, adaptability, and low overhead in a high-throughput setting. It continuously updates per-object congestion weights and requires minimal infrastructure.
```

#### Alternative Approaches
We considered more sophisticated models, including recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which are well-suited for learning temporal patterns and could offer higher prediction accuracy in complex congestion scenarios. However, RNNs have drawbacks:

- Higher computational cost and memory footprint

- Greater complexity in tuning and deployment

Given the early stage of the proposal and the requirement for integration with live, high-throughput transaction streams, we opted to first implement online gradient descent. This simpler model allows rapid prototyping, direct interpretability of object weights, and easier integration with tooling.

#### Roadmap for Comparison

> There is a draft plan to implement and evaluate both models—online SGD and RNNs—on historical transaction datasets. This will allow for empirical comparison of accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Depending on results, we may later recommend a more advanced architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a draft plan to implement and evaluate both models (online SGD and RNNs) on historical transaction datasets. This will allow for empirical comparison of accuracy, responsiveness, and usability. Depending on results, we may later recommend a more advanced architecture.
```
